dev/reference/*: add `use sql statements` (#1192)
pingcap/docs: dev/reference/tools/tidb-binlog/operation.md

# TiDB-Binlog Cluster Operations

## Pump or Drainer state

Pump or Drainer state description:

* `online`: running normally.
* `pausing`: in the pausing process. It turns into this state after you use `kill` or press Ctrl + C to exit from the process. When Pump or Drainer exits all internal threads in safe, it becomes `paused`.
* `paused`: has been stopped. While Pump is in this state, it rejects the request of writing binlog into it and does not provide the binlog for Drainer any more. When Drainer is in this state, it does not replicate data to the downstream. After Pump and Drainer exit normally from all the threads, they switch the state to `paused` and then exits from the process.
* `closing`: in the offline process. The `binlogctl` is used to get Pump or Drainer offline and Pump or Drainer is in this state before the process exits. In this state, Pump does not accept new requests of writing binlog into it and waits for all the binlog data to be used up by Drainer.

> * `offline`: becomes offline. After Pump sent all the binlog data that it saves to Drainer, its state is switched to `offline`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* `offline`: becomes offline. After Pump sends all the binlog data that it saves to Drainer, its state is switched to `offline`.
```

> **Note:**
>
> * When Pump or Drainer is `pausing` or `paused`, the data replication is interrupted.
> * Pump and Drainer have several states, including `online`, `paused`, and `offline`. If you press Ctrl + C or `kill` the process, both Pump and Drainer become `pausing` then finally turn to `paused` . There is no need for Pump to send all the binlog data to Drainer before it become `paused` while Pump need to send all the binlog data to Drainer before it become `offline` . If you need to exit from Pump for a long period of time (or are permanently removing Pump from the cluster), use `binlogctl` to make Pump offline. The same goes for Drainer.
> * When Pump is `closing`, you need to guarantee that all the data has been consumed by all the Drainers that are not `offline`. So before making Pump offline, you need to guarantee all the Drainers are `online`. Otherwise, Pump cannot get offline normally.
> * The binlog data that Pump saves is processed by GC only when it has been consumed by all the Drainers that are not `offline`.
> * Close Drainer only when it will not be used any more.

> For how to pause, close, check, and modify the states of Drainer, see the [binlogctl guide](#binlogctl-guide) as follows.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For how to pause, close, check, and modify the state of Drainer, see the [binlogctl guide](#binlogctl-guide) as follows.
```

## `binlogctl` guide

[`binlogctl`](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb-tools/tree/master/tidb-binlog/binlogctl) is an operations tool for TiDB-Binlog with the following features:

* Obtaining the current `tso` of TiDB cluster

> * Checking the states of Pump or Drainer

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Checking the state of Pump or Drainer
```

> * Modifying the states of Pump or Drainer

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Modifying the state of Pump or Drainer
```

* Pausing or closing Pump or Drainer

### Usage scenarios of `binlogctl`

* It is the first time you run Drainer and you need to obtain the current `tso` of TiDB cluster.
* When Pump or Drainer exits abnormally, its state is not updated and the service is affected. You can use this tool to modify the state.

> * An error occurs during data replication and you need to check the running status and states of Pump or Drainer.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* An error occurs during data replication and you need to check the running status and state of Pump or Drainer.
```

Your distribution of TiDB or TiDB-Binlog may already include binlogctl. If not, download `binlogctl`:

```bash
wget https://download.pingcap.org/tidb-{version}-linux-amd64.tar.gz
wget https://download.pingcap.org/tidb-{version}-linux-amd64.sha256

> # Check the file integrity. It should return OK.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# Check the file integrity. If the result is OK, the file is correct.
```

```
Command example:

- Check the state of all the Pump or Drainer nodes:

    Set `cmd` as `pumps` or `drainers` to check the state of all the Pump or Drainer nodes. For example,

    ```bash
    bin/binlogctl -pd-urls=http://127.0.0.1:2379 -cmd pumps

    INFO[0000] pump: {NodeID: ip-172-16-30-67:8250, Addr: 172.16.30.192:8250, State: online, MaxCommitTS: 405197570529820673, UpdateTime: 2018-12-25 14:23:37 +0800 CST}
    ```

> - Modify the states of Pump or Drainer:

Reviewer: Please see my previous suggestion.

```suggestion
- Modify the state of Pump or Drainer:
```

    Set `cmd` as `update-pump` or `update-drainer` to modify the states of Pump or Drainer, which can be `online`, `pausing`, `paused`, `closing` or `offline`.

    ```bash
    bin/binlogctl -pd-urls=http://127.0.0.1:2379 -cmd update-pump -node-id ip-127-0-0-1:8250 -state paused
    ```

>     This command modifies the states of Pump or Drainer saved in the Placement Driver (PD).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    This command modifies the state of Pump or Drainer saved in the Placement Driver (PD).
```

    ```

    This command generates a `{data-dir}/savepoint` file. This file stores the `tso` information which is needed for the initial start of Drainer.

> ## Use SQL statements to control Pump or Drainer

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Use SQL statements to manage Pump or Drainer
```

> Execute the corresponded SQL statements in the TiDB server to check or modify the state of binlog.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To view or modify binlog related states, execute corresponding SQL statements in TiDB.
```

> - Check whether the binlog is enabled:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Check whether binlog is enabled:
```

    ```bash
    mysql> show variables like "log_bin";
    +---------------+-------+
    | Variable_name | Value |
    +---------------+-------+
    | log_bin       |  ON   |
    +---------------+-------+
    ```

    When the Value is `ON`, it means that the binlog is enabled.

> - Check the status of all the Pumps and Drainers:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Check the status of all the Pump or Drainer nodes:
```

    | NodeID |     Address    | State  |   Max_Commit_Ts    |    Update_Time      |
    +--------|----------------|--------|--------------------|---------------------|
    | pump1  | 127.0.0.1:8250 | Online | 408553768673342237 | 2019-05-01 00:00:01 |
    +--------|----------------|--------|--------------------|---------------------|
    | pump2  | 127.0.0.2:8250 | Online | 408553768673342335 | 2019-05-01 00:00:02 |
    +--------|----------------|--------|--------------------|---------------------|
    ```

    ```bash
    mysql> show drainer status;
    +----------|----------------|--------|--------------------|---------------------|
    |  NodeID  |     Address    | State  |   Max_Commit_Ts    |    Update_Time      |
    +----------|----------------|--------|--------------------|---------------------|
    | drainer1 | 127.0.0.3:8249 | Online | 408553768673342532 | 2019-05-01 00:00:03 |
    +----------|----------------|--------|--------------------|---------------------|
    | drainer2 | 127.0.0.4:8249 | Online | 408553768673345531 | 2019-05-01 00:00:04 |
    +----------|----------------|--------|--------------------|---------------------|
    ```

> - Modify the state of the Pump/Drainer node:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Modify the state of a Pump or Drainer node:
```

    ```bach
    mysql> change pump to node_state ='paused' for node_id 'pump1'";
    Query OK, 0 rows affected (0.01 sec)
    ```

    ```bach
    mysql> change drainer to node_state ='paused' for node_id 'drainer1'";
    Query OK, 0 rows affected (0.01 sec)
    ```

> **Note:**
>

> > - TiDB v2.1.7 or higher supports checking whether the binlog is enabled and the running status of Pump/Drainer.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> - Checking whether binlog is enabled and the running status of Pump or Drainer is supported in TiDB v2.1.7 and later versions.
```

> > - TiDB v3.0.0-rc.1 or higher supports modifying the state of Pump/Drainer. Only the state of the Pump/Drainer which is stored in Placement Driver (PD) can be changed. If you want to pause or close the node, the `binlogctl` is still required to use.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> - Modifying the status of Pump or Drainer is supported in TiDB v3.0.0-rc.1 and later versions. This feature only supports modifying the status of Pump or Drainer nodes stored in the Placement Driver (PD). To pause or close the node, use the `binlogctl` tool.
```

    +--------|----------------|--------|--------------------|---------------------|
    ```

    ```bash
    mysql> show drainer status;
    +----------|----------------|--------|--------------------|---------------------|
    |  NodeID  |     Address    | State  |   Max_Commit_Ts    |    Update_Time      |
    +----------|----------------|--------|--------------------|---------------------|
    | drainer1 | 127.0.0.3:8249 | Online | 408553768673342532 | 2019-05-01 00:00:03 |
    +----------|----------------|--------|--------------------|---------------------|
    | drainer2 | 127.0.0.4:8249 | Online | 408553768673345531 | 2019-05-01 00:00:04 |
    +----------|----------------|--------|--------------------|---------------------|
    ```

<<<<<<< HEAD
- Modify the states of the Pump or Drainer node:
=======
- Modify the state of a Pump or Drainer node:
>>>>>>> 36c13cff2696e78ee84f08e0b4c286859d5405fd

    ```bach
    mysql> change pump to node_state ='paused' for node_id 'pump1'";
    Query OK, 0 rows affected (0.01 sec)
    ```

    ```bach
    mysql> change drainer to node_state ='paused' for node_id 'drainer1'";
    Query OK, 0 rows affected (0.01 sec)
    ```

> **Note:**
>

> <<<<<<< HEAD

Reviewer 2: It looks like you are accidentally committing a git merge here.

Author: It seems the conflict arises when I commit the suggestion on the github web while some commits are still in the desktop. Thanks for your reminder!
